[Music]
[Applause]
the nurse grabbed the recliner and
jerked me awake I heard code blue and
the room filled with people in that
instant I knew he was gone the doctors
words attempted optimism but their faces
betrayed them the next hours were awful
my sweet boy had become a corpse hooked
to machines i sat next to him begging
him to come back to me but really I
wanted to flee I didn't want any of this
to be happening I wanted to wake up
stiff and uncomfortable in that ugly
blue chair and realize it all was just a
very bad dream but this was far worse
than a nightmare my 20 month old son had
just died in one of the country's
leading hospitals on Thursday he was
sick and on Tuesday he was dead that
night when he had been admitted to the
hospital white circles with wires were
stuck under Gabriel's bare little chest
to monitor his breathing and heartbeat
every time he made the slightest little
wiggle the alarms would go off and
they're loud every time we would almost
be asleep the racket and worry would
start all over again we'd already spent
sleepless days and nights in my local
hospital where he had been misdiagnosed
again and again but now we were in a
University Hospital for children
finally here I felt safe and very tired
and I'm sure the
nurse could see how tired I was and she
wanted to take care of me too so she did
the logical thing she turned off the
alarms on the machine next to his bed
and I thanked her when she did it I was
so grateful for the prospect of silence
and sleep later doctors and
administrators from the hospital would
explain that actually unknowingly she
had done a lot more she hadn't just
turned the racket off in the room she
turned off all of the alarms everywhere
in his room at the nurse's station and
on her pager
later the manufacturers of the monitors
would explain they didn't think anyone
would go through the trouble of seven
screens to turn off all of the alarms so
they didn't include a fail-safe to stop
her
they were wrong
so when Gabriel's heart stopped beating
there was no sound just quiet
nothing woke me until several minutes
had passed and I was being jerked awake
and the room filled with people and
panic
imagine if you were that nurse if you
had done what she had done you're doing
your job a demanding job an important
job and you do something that causes
someone to die a beautiful child dies
because you think you're doing a good
thing
then your shift is over and you have to
look as mother in the eye until our
goodbye and the next day you're expected
to go back to your job carry on go about
your business
all the while hoping and trusting that
nothing else terrible happens
I could never do that job I'm not that
brave
my response to what happened to Gabriel
is not unique like most people who have
experienced errors in medical care we
want three things we want an honest
transparent explanation of what has
happened we want a full apology and we
want to know and see that changes have
been made to ensure that what has
happened to us never happens to anyone
else unlike what we can see nightly in
television courtroom dramas people don't
immediately seek lawyers we want answers
not money people hire lawyers because
they feel deceived and abandoned it is a
very emotionally and financially
expensive last resort that none of us
want to do
and the thing is we all make mistakes
it's just that for most of us the
consequences are pretty small I don't
hit the submit button in my online
banking account and the power company
gets paid late and I get a low fee or I
forget that on Wednesdays school get out
gets out early and my daughter's annoyed
when I'm late to pick her up I'm
annoying so pretty used to that we all
know that the power company doesn't
expect a whole lot for me and I hope my
daughter knows that though I may be late
she also knows I'm always going to be
there but we expect so much more from
people in medicine we trust them with
what we value the most our lives and our
loved ones and then expect impossible
perfection we want the human element
when it means kindness and compassion
like the nurse trying to give us a
couple hours of sleep but we deny it
when it means possible failure
we're never going to have it both ways
the day after he died the Gabriel's
nurse left that hospital for good I hope
she was not fired legally I cannot be
told but I know she never returned to
that Children's Hospital and I get it I
wouldn't be able to go back there either
and one of the pediatric neurosurgeons
who took care of Gabriel he let her
later quit practicing medicine
altogether all of their expertise and
wisdom and experience is no longer
helping children that is another tragedy
and another very expensive system
failure
unfortunately hospital administrators
don't tend to respond to medical errors
with openness and transparency they
react with a legal version of fight or
flight deny and defend this means keep
your head down shut up and let the
lawyers handle everything this is a very
dangerous and expensive response that we
all should be concerned about it would
have been easy for the university
hospital administrators to blame the
nurse fire her and assume the problem
had been solved because the bad apple
was gone
it would have been typical deny and
defend behavior for them to ignore my
questions to go silent and hope i
couldn't gather my thoughts enough to
file a lawsuit it would have been a safe
bet but they didn't do that they didn't
prey on my vulnerability instead they
investigated they explained took
responsibility and apologized then they
asked me what else they could do it made
all of the difference
transparency in medicine can help heal
our medical system and we all know that
it needs a lot of help by being open and
honest when the unexpected happens we
can learn from our mistakes we can find
the deadly system failures and we can
act to fix them after the University
Hospital investigated Gabriel's death
and the weakness in the monitors was
discovered all other hospitals using the
same equipment were alerted to the
vulnerability
maybe that helped someone else I will
never know but it's still comforts with
me now
after he died the little plastic ID band
that was around his tiny wrist should
have been slipped on to mine there was
nothing more that could have been done
for him but there was plenty that needed
to be done for me I needed an infusion
of truth and compassion and the nurses
and doctors who took care of him they
needed it too we all should have been
given ID bans and become patients that
day death is a full stop for the patient
in the hospital bed but it is only just
a very terrible beginning for the
survivors left in the room hospital
should extend their care to these people
because the impact of this these kind of
experiences is slow painful and toxic
this is how transparency can help the
survivors
and these kind of experiences they
demand that we relive them over and over
again and those memories become dense
and strong like thick black coffee and
just like too much caffeine that
reliving keeps us up at night and can
make us a bit sick
you
and the parts of these visions and
memories that we have the parts that
don't make sense in and are unclear they
become voids so we fill them in
phenomenon is translated directly from
Latin as making up we wonder if
things could have been different we feel
guilty maybe we place blame where it
doesn't belong this is how transparency
is healing it finds truth and it can
take away the infection of guilt and
doubt
Gabriel was treated at two different
hospitals he died because of mistakes
made at both of them accidents that no
one wanted to have happen but how I was
treated after he died was no accident
how they responded to those mistakes was
very deliberate both had the opportunity
to learn from my son's death and be
transparent but only one did so though I
really wish I didn't I know both sides
of the transparency coin the University
Hospital didn't hide behind legal
maneuvers and dismiss me they learned
they explained and they changed the
procedures in their hospital to ensure
that all of the children who were
patients there were safer
now they encouraged me to share my ideas
they seek out my opinions and they value
what I have learned from Gabriel dying
they give me the opportunity to help
people and that makes his life bigger
but the local hospital ignored me
by going silent they didn't just
humiliate me they deny Gabriel his
dignity
and after more than eight years that
wound is very far from healing
I wish the story I just told you was
rare but it is not errors in health care
are common the exact numbers are hard to
determine this is another side effect of
deny and defend but a shocking accepted
number is that a hundred thousand people
will die in the US this year because of
preventable mistakes this means this
year there will be a hundred thousand
opportunities to learn a hundred
thousand lives we should honor a hundred
thousand opportunities to choose truth
and compassion over deny and defend
I know what I'm asking for is big I want
a culture change maybe I'm talking about
a revolution and I know what the
opponents say that transparency in
medicine will just be a field day for
the lawyers insurance companies will
never play along and the already busy
hospitals will just be distracted by it
but case after case study after study
proves the opponent's wrong transparency
in medicine will save us money and make
us all safer
those are both good and noble pursuits
but it's not why we should do it we
should do it because eventually we all
are going to need to wear one of those
plastic ID bands eventually we all are
going to need the good healing medicine
of truth and compassion
thank you
[Applause]